This is an interview with Mr. Virgil Gay by Wanda
Marison Masek in 1994 at the Northgate Parking
Garage, 2nd floor, concerning black awareness in
the 1960s and early 70s. In the interest of
accumulating knowledge about this, I am going to
donate this tape to Texane and Oral History
Collection in the University Archives.
I was born in what they call Third Ward area. At the
time, the hospital was called Houston Negro
Hospital. And it was a segregated hospital
system, so there was a lot of other things going on
in Houston in the 1950s. So. Where did you live in
high school? Went to Edward Warden High School in
Houston. It's south of Houston. I grew up, well, I
should have said my first
called Suburbia out there. But it was a wood kind of
school.
All of my formal education through high school was
in a segregated setting. The only time I was ever
really exposed to whites or around them was when
you would go shopping like in a store or something
downtown. They didn't have the proliferation of
malls that they have now. But when you would go
downtown to Foley's or somewhere like that, you
know,
My dad worked for Swift Meatpacking as a beef bar,
but they both did other jobs. And so basically, you
know, there was a situation where I wanted to be an
architect.
with the white students, football.
and go to Prairie View after Howard, I elected to go
to A&M. And besides my other school on the other end
of the spectrum, the white end of the spectrum, was
Southern Cal. It was definitely too expensive. I
think back in 1969 when A&M was running about
$1,000 a year, Southern Cal was already $4,000 a
year. Wow. It had a big difference. It felt a big
difference. It was about three times as much. What
were your first impressions of Texas A&M? uh you
know uh to be honest with you i was i've always was
from the first time i saw the campus and and have
always been impressed with the amount of
facilities that they have here the amount of
effort they put into having a university just
amount of support so i was uh impressed i guess with
Basically,
as I remember it, I graduated undergraduate
school with better than a 3.0. I think it was a 3.2.3
or something like that. Better than MISC and
whatever that is you get to make it with honors or
whatever. But anyway, there were some rough
spots, but overall, in order to have a 3.0 average,
it was better than that. I had
taught in high school that, you know, of course
there was no girls going here, at least living on
campus here. It was horny to not live on campus. So
that reduced the number that were available to be
on campus, because people wouldn't let the girls
come and live in an apartment. But anyway, and you
know, we were always told, I said all that
and do all that stuff. Well, what I quickly found
out was one of those what I call the great
equalizers in life. You always wind up, if you go in
and do your best, generally speaking, there may be
some people that are smarter than you are. And
definitely speaking, there probably will be some
people that are not as smart as you are. And so, what
you learn real quickly
the only real regret that I have of not staying in
the Corps was the band. I was a very serious
classes started, I was probably in uniform a full
two days, maybe, before I was out. The court was
interesting. I liked a lot of things that went on,
but to be honest with you, having never gone to
school once before, never been in a situation,
having been told these guys are going to be real
smart, I wanted to make sure that I didn't
You know, a lot of times you have to realize being
brought up
So the communities were a lot safer and all that.
And you really didn't get into the sting of racism
until you got outside of your community, you know,
for the most part. You went to school, all your
teachers were black. They were positive role
models for you. You know, they encouraged you to go
to college. You know, you went to church. You know,
it was all...
when you went outside uh i did uh encounter a couple
things one i remember once when we were traveling i
was a teenager and we were going to washington d.c
on vacation and i believe it was mississippi we
stopped in to get some gas this had to be about 1967
And at that time, I'll never forget it. It was an
Exxon station. I think they call them Esso or Enco
or something then. Humble, whatever. At the time,
they were putting gas in the car. My mother jumped
out of the car and went off to a water fountain and
started taking a drink. And the guy that owned that
station just, you know, he didn't go berserk after
my mom, but he like, boy, he like in a hurry got over
there and said, well,
He motioned, my dad motioned to my mom, the kid in
the car. And we both, you know, we got in the car. I
never got out of the car. They got in the car.
Proceed to tell her that's why we brought water.
Because, you know, hundreds of people are. And,
you know, you have memories like that. I remember
stopping somewhere in Tennessee at a hamburger
stand. They didn't have the McDonald's and these
other places. And they parked one night because we
were hungry. And, you know, you had, in front of the
hamburger stand, these were walk-up windows.
They had white on the other side to color. And so to
sit there in a car and watch your dad go up to the
color side and buy some hamburgers and come back
and eat and go, you know, kind of thing. So, you
know, you knew it was there, although it really
didn't necessarily affect you right where you
lived. One incident that was particularly ugly, I
thought, because it was adults involved and what I
call children involved.
show stuff, kind of like our band director, I
think, really liked Florida Anaheim's band and
used to do a lot of stuff like that in the Grambling.
So we would try to mimic some of the things that they
would do. And so we got invited to the March 1
Houston Ola games, you know, preseason games. And
they still do the kind of thing they have on some of
the preseason games. They have a high school band
that performs. Well, anyway, to make a long story
short, when we were in Riverside Stadium,
there were some patrons, mostly adults, I don't
remember seeing any children, that were throwing
things and saying, ah, niggas this, and niggas
that, you know. And, I don't know, when you look
back on it as an
you any discrimination here attending class or
from a professor personally? Actually when I got
here A&M I think was trying to be fairly good
citizens about the whole thing. Students had only
been here since about like
He used it as a text and it was about slavery time and
all that. The whole premise of this author's book
was that blacks were better off and happier doing
slavery time and all this kind of business. And it
was rather obnoxious.
challenged
him on it and made him basically apologize to me in
front of the class, to me and another student
actually, in front of the class the next time we had
class. And I was, you know, I was nice about it. I
waited until after class and just, the way I did it,
brother, I just told him that, you know, I noticed
this was open architecture. You know, I just told
him I was really disappointed in him for saying
something like that.
They didn't have...
programming issues. So that's why we chose the
name, because we were making people aware of, you
know, blackness. You know, what it was like to be
black, and so we took it as an alternative. Prior to
that, we would meet off campus, you know, the black
students would. So, I was fortunate. I think I was
in a decent major in architecture, all the way up
on building issues. You know, if there was
something that needed to be done
There was an opportunity in American history
during Reconstruction that a lot of this could
have been nipped in the bud. But then the federal
government had a decision that basically ushered
in the area of Jim Crowism. And then once they did
that, then whites tried to turn back the clock. And
they were allowed to do that for a while.
I'm not sure how we knew that he was there, but I
think that a couple of times
Well, really, black power is, in essence,
so that
I can remember what it was like for me. But as long as
you have racism,
people see that you know there's some
things that leads me again to another question
with uh mexican americans hispanics um was there
any binding or bonding done between african
americans and mexican americans here i think
generally speaking it was uh i wasn't really you
know
No.
you sort of really put a lot of those people
situation or do you want to deal with people who
want to just burn a sucker and start over? But it
works. To me, they both work together.
Y'all ever meet some people down here?
Yeah.
1970.
and all that kind of business. Confused about it
for the most part, not really very sophisticated
on it.
They don't want it. He wants it to be